any kind of money
whatever gets used is money the fact
that it's used as money will incentivize
anybody who can produce it to make more
of it so if there was an easy way to
make gold we'd all be out there looking
into gold
prospecting but then you know we'd flood
the market with gold and then it would
stop being gold and the reason that gold
was money is because it was very hard to
find in large quantities compared to the
existing supply which i explained in
more depth in the bitcoin standard
[Music]
moose welcome to the show
thank you for having me tom it's a
pleasure to be here dude i am super
uneasy to make sure that i
help
get these huge ideas across you've
written a book called well you've
written multiple books but uh the one
we're going to be talking about today is
the fiat standard you also wrote the
bitcoin standard um
as i have gotten more into um
understanding bitcoin and
cryptocurrencies in general
uh
then you
begin to encounter the ideas of what
money is what fiat is i mean this is
something i've been in my entire life
but had no idea what it was
if you can what i want to do is start
with a brief description of
what fiat is
then we're going to tell people what the
subtitle of your book is which i think
will set us up nicely and then i have a
really interesting quote from your book
that i want to get into
so what is fiat
so
the way that i wrote the fiat standard
was almost like uh an imitation of the
bitcoin standard it was like a knockoff
of the bitcoin standard and that with
the bitcoin standard i looked at bitcoin
with um you know everybody's an amateur
when it comes to bitcoin it's such a new
thing nobody's an expert in bitcoin so i
decided to just come at it
from first principles try and figure out
how it works look at it functionally and
then tease out the implications of this
thing continuing to work and operate
and that worked out pretty well the book
sold very well i i heard from a lot of
people that they enjoyed it and they
liked it and it was quite influential so
then i thought for my next trick i
should do the same thing
for the
fiat monetary system which is the
monetary system that everybody uses but
in a sense we've never had the luxury of
looking at it with fresh eyes because
you know it's like asking a fish to
tablet
asking a fish about what the water is
like well we've always been in water
it's just what we're used to
so i decided imagine if um i
you were coming at this civilization
that was using this monetary system from
scratch and you were trying to
understand how this thing works or um so
what what is it how does it function
explaining it as if it's just another
you know digital currency similar to
bitcoin uh and trying to draw analogy
with bitcoin and i found that to be a
quite powerful analytical tool in order
to understand how fiat works and it was
the perfect setup for writing the sequel
to the bitcoin standard since the
bitcoin standard was all about
how uh you know why i think bitcoin is
such a big deal why i think bitcoin is
going to succeed
um the question that the bitcoin
standard leaves you with is well then
how is it going to interact with the
prevalent monetary system how will this
survive how is it going to grow what's
going to be the relationship between the
fiat monetary system and the bitcoin
monetary system
and in
the fiat standard i thought
this is really the perfect way of
approaching it let's study fiat and then
that will help us figure out how it
would interact with bitcoin and i found
that to be quite a useful framework so
by drawing analogy to how bitcoin works
you know bitcoin has nodes bitcoin has
mining and um we have a decentralized
network where everybody determines the
rules if you just carry these things
into fiat and then try and analyze how
fiat works well you find
in the case of fiat you know we don't
have a distributed network of nodes we
have i mean there are nodes but they're
not all equal it's not peer-to-peer like
in bitcoin where every node gets to
dictate its own rules and then the
network only works
between the nodes that agree on
the rules and so it's entirely voluntary
well bitcoin is different well fiat is
different fiat is a network where
there's one sovereign node that
determines the rules for everybody else
and that's the us federal reserve
and then there are all these partial
nodes around the world that can sort of
determine the rules locally you know the
local central banks but then they are
kind of subordinate to the uh
master node that runs the global
monetary system and that i think is
quite um important to understanding the
political situation in the world the
geopolitics of the world today you know
thinking because it opens up people to
manipulate it because one thing i've
heard you say about um
if i were going to have a concern about
bitcoin it would be that at some point
something happens where it begins to
centralize that there are fewer nodes
and it becomes more likely that somebody
can manipulate it and so as you start
talking about the fiat standard it's
like hey the entire problem with the
fiat standard is that it can be
manipulated now to your earlier point
about this is water right um what's it
brian foster wallace i'm forgetting his
first name i think uh
that
fish don't even understand that they are
in water when i before i started the
journey into crypto i thought of money
as a force of nature it just is a thing
like gravity it it is and first
principles would lead you to the
axiomatic understanding that money is
and it
there's this paper representation of
what money is that makes it easy to
transfer but i had no concept of a lot
of
how it's entirely constructed
wildly manipulated even if you assume
good intent that it's it is this thing
that is designed to orchestrate society
and so i was like okay that was a very
eye-opening introduction to things and
then as you begin to peel back the
layers and you realize
that
there is disturbing there's a disturbing
setup right breaking away from gold and
we'll get into that but
that there is a um
it's influencing society in ways that
you would never have guessed because
you're so used to it and
i want to talk about the the subtitle of
your book so if fiat money is money by
decree the government says there's
nothing backing this other than i say
it's valuable and so as long as
everybody agrees we're good i can print
as much as i want i can just keep making
it up
because it is literally money by decree
gold is money by
star explosion right so it's limited
because it is a metal that happens when
stars explode that embed themselves into
the crust of our earth and therefore
there's a limited quantity
so
you begin to understand okay wait
there's different types of money and
then obviously we'll get into bitcoin
and hard money and sound money and all
of that but i want to give people that
setup of money is not
a property of nature
that it is
fiat is something that is created
and by a ridiculously small number of
nodes to use the bitcoin analogy yeah
that's the um you know if we the next
question is all right so there's nodes
but then what about mining we know how
bitcoin mining works and we know how uh
well i explain it in the bitcoin
standard and we know how gold mining
works well how does fiat mining work so
most people have the idea that it's just
fiat is paper money and then the
government prints it when it's needed in
order to keep the economy going and
that's false the majority of fiat money
is digital less than 10 percent of
dollars are
in paper form the majority of dollars
are digital dollars they don't exist in
physical form so how do they come into
existence and the answer to that is that
fiat money comes into existence when
debt is created when loans are made new
fiat money is generated and this is
really the key
uh starting point of the analysis of the
book because this is a very powerful
concept once you draw analogy between
lending in the fiat world and mining in
bitcoin and in gold
a lot of the world around us begins to
make a lot of sense so any kind of money
whatever gets used is money the fact
that it's used as money will incentivize
anybody who can produce it to make more
of it so if there was an easy way to
make gold we'd all be out there looking
into gold prospecting but then you know
we'd flood the market with gold and then
it would stop being gold and the reason
that gold was money is because it was
very hard to find in large quantities
compared to the existing supply which i
explained in more depth in the bitcoin
standard
and in bitcoin you know we have the
difficulty adjustment which continues to
make mining bitcoin difficult for most
people and only makes it profitable for
the people who do it very efficiently
the most efficient miners the ones who
mine at the lowest electricity cost
well in the case of fiat
basically anytime a
government-backed entity or central
bank-backed entity is able to issue
credit
new money is made
so what does that tell you about this is
so scandalous when i came across that in
the book i i literally took a note wait
is it that's how loans work is this
always how
loans worked and money gets into the
system it can you give the example that
you gave in the book about how you've
got a house you're about to buy a house
the house exists but the money doesn't
and it is going to come into existence i
was like what
this is still i i can't believe i'm
actually understanding what you're
saying correctly this seems impossible
and i discovered this 48 hours ago when
i started reading your book how's this
true
yeah well i mean uh yeah so let's say
you're gonna sell me your house your
house is worth a million dollars i agree
with you that i want to buy the one
million dollar house from you
now
i have two options i can take one
million dollars from my money and go and
give it to you in cash and then uh in
that situation no debt is created and so
no new money is created the money supply
stays constant all that happens that i
have a million dollars less and you have
a million dollars more
but
most people obviously are buying homes
by borrowing so i go to my bank and i
tell them hey i found this house i want
to buy it i want to borrow a million
dollars forget about the
down payment first for for simplicity
now so let's say i'm just gonna go
borrow a million dollars from the bank
well the bank is not going to take one
million dollars from other depositors
and give them to me they don't need to
do that that's the whole way in which
banking works in the fiat system they
will give me a loan and because they're
backed by the central bank because
they're a regulated financial
institution that is
backed and regulated by the central bank
they will make those new one million
dollars so the money supply will
increase by 1 million dollars after that
loan is generated so the bank now owns
owns a 1 million loan i owe the bank 1
million dollars you have an extra 1
million dollars in your bank account
which you got from the bank
and i own the house
so
you know the money supply has increased
by a million dollars it's we've devalued
everybody else's money in society in
order for me to buy your house
and that's really very powerful when you
think about it because it's like mining
you know when you mine new gold you
devalue everybody else's gold when you
make new bitcoin you're kind of
devaluing everybody else's bitcoin with
the new bitcoin that you're producing
and when you make a loan from a
financially uh from from a financial
institution that is backed by the
central bank new money is created note
it's not the same if i borrowed that
money from my mom
my mom takes one million dollars from
her bank she gives them to me
that doesn't create any new money my mom
is not backed by the uh central bank to
issue those loans
great news if you're watching this
episode that means you're actually doing
the work to research this new world of
finance cryptocurrencies nfts web3 all
of it seriously i commend you most
people are going to write all of this
off without even looking into it and
that means that most people are going to
miss out on what could be in my opinion
one of the greatest wealth transfers in
history now look it's incredibly
important that you do your own research
i cannot see the future i just know that
something very important is happening
right now and it warrants you taking the
time to look at it to do the research
now if you're excited at all about
learning about all of the changes then i
invite you to join my special community
of like-minded people on our discord by
going to
impacttheory.com forward slash discord
since you're watching this video and
learning about crypto and the future of
the blockchain you should know that this
really is the future of impact theory
about nine months ago we decided to
pivot because i can see that this is
where the world is going and this is
truly the moment of disruption that
we've been looking for and discord
really is the best place for you to
begin to engage with that side of impact
theory we've launched our first flagship
nft the impact theory founders key and
our holiday feature narrative mary mods
which is also an nft project and i
promise you you're going to be blown
away by what we're doing we've got a lot
more planned for years to come we have a
long term very aggressive very fun
roadmap so if you want to turn this
learning into action i hope you will
join us in our discord community at
impacttheory.com
forward slash discord all right back to
today's episode
so
all right hold on this still i
understand the words you're saying it
seems impossible that this is true
so
how
what are the
guard rails on a bank because uh what
was it charlie munger that said
tell me the incentives and i'll tell you
the outcome so as i hear that a bank can
now because they're going to get
the fees from servicing that loan
and
that means they're incentivized to loan
as much as they can because it they
literally get to make up the money and
then
take a a pull off that
who limits that
well what limits that is the central
bank the central bank doesn't just allow
them to go out and give loans to
everybody although it might look like it
at times there are and the central bank
is is per country
yeah every country has its own central
bank more or less
that all use this same idea
but yep basically yeah this is the 20th
century for you
so the central bank puts regulations on
what uh who on who can borrow and how
they can borrow and what
they're able to borrow and so you know
there are criteria they're not just
gonna give a million dollars to anybody
although you know
recently it looks like it aren't they
yeah but i mean generally you're gonna
have to have some income and some kind
of um
some kind of way of demonstrating that
you are able to make those payments back
and that's kind of the uh
political restraint on uh fiat mining
that the central bank doesn't just allow
anybody to do it and that if a central
bank
uh if a bank issues too many loans then
the central bank uh
will punish it in certain ways you know
it'll have liquidity problems that it
might get liquidated and go out of
business
but in reality
the real check on this is the fact that
if you just issue too many loans you
have a lot of
insolvent borrowers and then those
borrowers don't pay you back and then
that causes your um
you know that causes the money supply to
contract so the way that we limit the
growth of the fiat money is that credit
creation is in itself self-correcting
and that's the important insight that we
gain from the austrian school of
economics and the austrian business
cycle of the
austrian theory of the business cycle
which is that
banks want to create as much credit as
they can and they do but then that just
means many more people have money and
are investing and have resources and
that leads to central banks and that
leads to a bubble and then that leads to
a collapse and then when there's a
collapse you know i can't pay back my
loan to the bank well that reduces the
money supply now because the bank is
gone now
yeah the money's gone now and the bank
has the house so i'm homeless the bank
has the house the bank needs to sell the
house but obviously now that we've had a
credit crash and the bank can't issue as
much credit as it used to before when it
tries to sell that house there won't be
as many suckers as me like me willing to
buy the house so they're probably going
to get a lower uh price for it so they
the one million dollar house is gonna
sell for something like half a million
dollar house and so this kind of process
of
boom and bust is what's limiting the
credit money system from continuing to
grow
and that's kind of the equivalent of the
difficulty adjustment in bitcoin and
that it limits the growth of the money
supply so that it's not
hyperinflationary and in fact when we've
seen examples of hyperinflation we have
seen hyperinflation under this fiat
monetary system in fact it's the only
monetary system that has
seen hyperinflation but when we do see
hyperinflation it's not through credit
creation
it's when the credit creation gets out
of hand and then the government wants to
bail out its buddies and then they crank
the actual physical printing presses
that's the case in lebanon right now
like the actual physical bills
have gone up in circulation uh the
physical bills in supply the supply has
gone up by about seven fold in the first
two years since the currency began to
devalue so
they've gone seven fold and so the price
of the currency has
dropped more than 90 percent
um but
yeah
but generally
that's the case in zimbabwe and that's
the case in venezuela because what
happens is that you know you keep doing
this what governments do is they keep
playing this
credit creation game like like an addict
taking another hit of crack all the time
and then you know the come down keeps uh
getting worse and worse and then to
ameliorate the come downs they start
printing money once you get into the
phase of printing money that's when it
goes
to the dogs basically
all right there's a few things i want to
anchor around
for people that are like me where they
have enough information to follow along
but they
need some of these breadcrumbs put
together um
so i had read your whole book and
because i i do everything audio i
actually hadn't seen the sub headline
and i thought ah after reading this i
need to see like the sub head of this
and so
uh i will read the sub headline which is
the debt slavery alternative to human
civilization
okay so then it's like all right wait a
second
the
the is this a good alternative like what
are we talking about here and i want to
uh read a quote from your book which you
you said earlier but i think this quote
really sums it up
getting others is a quote from the book
getting others in into debt is the fiat
standards version of gold prospecting
so
the whole way that the fiat system
gets more of this very coveted thing is
to get as you just walked us through
people to take on debt which creates
these debt cycles which i'd heard about
but didn't understand
and
so we are in this sort of forever boom
and bust constantly pulling levers like
trying to engineer the system
and
i'm curious to hear
what what's your sort of final take on
the fiat system because you you
i don't want to put words in your mouth
but you were basically like i want to
look at fiat because it's done some good
things so
where is the sort of good where does it
start to break down what's your final
edict
on the fiat standard having read the
book i think i have a pretty good idea
uh
but what what is that the final take on
this and what do you mean by that debt
slavery
alternative to civilization
yeah so historically all through human
history what humans have done is we've
always looked around and used things as
money and naturally whether through our
reason or just through evolutionary
selection money ends up being the
hardest thing to produce that's why the
whole world was on a gold standard by
the end of the 19th century because the
hardest thing to produce will hold on to
its value much better than everything
else is that why it's called hard money
it's hard to produce exactly yeah that's
what it is it's hard to produce and easy
money is easy to produce so the harder
our money
the more reliably we can provide for our
future you know you earn money today and
if you
if you're experiencing you throughout
your life and the experience of your
family and friends around you is that
you save one hundred dollars today and
then next year you expect it to be worth
102 for instance
you're likely to save quite a bit of
that money
more that much more than you would save
if your experience was that if i saved
those 100
next year their value is going to be
something like let's say 85 dollars
right so by saving if you lose money
from saving you're less likely to save
you're more likely to spend that money
today if the money is likely to
appreciate you're more likely to save
for the future so historically we've
always moved toward harder money and
that has led us to
constantly save more because that allows
us to provide for the future
and that is the basic building block of
civilization one of my favorite
economists hans hermann hopper says the
lowering of time preference is the in it
was is what initiates the process of
civilization and lowering time
preferences refers to the idea that you
um your time preference is the degree to
which you prefer the present to the
future and everybody prefers the present
to the future because the present is
certain the future is uncertain so if i
gave you
um you know choice between having a
house today and having that house 10
years from now you obviously would
prefer to take it today you wouldn't
want to wait to 10 years so if i gave
you the same choice between the same
amount of money the same purchasing
power today or in a year you prefer to
take it today
but there's
the
the higher your time preference the more
you prefer today and the more you
discount tomorrow so the less you care
about tomorrow so as we develop the
ability to have a stronger harder money
we are able to provide for our future
more we start discounting the future
less we start caring about the future
more we start providing for the future
more and that makes us more
you know more future oriented and so we
become more moral we become better
humans we become more civilized we
accumulate more capital
and we save more and we invest more and
then you know the more we save the more
capital we have available for investment
the more we invest the more the
productivity goes up the more our
standard of living increases that's
really the process of civilization
that's really i'd like my best metaphor
for it is to think about the fisherman
who goes from trying to catch fish with
his hands to building a fishing rod
that's capital you know you have to
sacrifice time fishing with your hands
in order to spend that time building a
fishing rod but then the result of that
is that you can now have a much higher
productivity after you've made that
initial sacrifice and then you build a
small boat and then you build a fishing
net and then you build a bigger boat and
then you build currently you know our
civilization has advanced to the point
where we have
giant trawlers that last 100 years and
continue to fish for 100 years you know
people 100 years ago were
giving up consumption to build those
gigantic boats that are still in use
until today
so that's the process of civilization
and it's a process that's
spurred by the hardness of money the
harder the money
the more we are able to provide for our
future the more we invest in the future
the more capital we accumulate and that
was basically the process of humanity up
until the turn of the 20th century and
then fiat really came along and provided
us with an alternative to this where now
you know gold's supply increased at
around one and a half to two percent per
year and now fiat's supply increases
around something like 14 per year on
average some currencies increase a lot
more some currencies increase a lot less
for the best currencies you know the us
dollar in the euro and the yen and the
swiss franc these currencies increase
every year around seven eight nine ten
percent or so
um
some currencies increase at 100 or 200
or so like you know the lebanese and
venezuelan currencies but if you counted
an average market weight it's around 14
or so so we go from 1.5 per year
increase in the money supply to 14 per
year increase in the money supply
so that
and that is happening because of the
massive incentive for mining fiat
through issuing debt
and that's really the subtitle of the
book we move from a process of human
civilization where everybody is saving
and accumulating wealth
in hard money in order to have a better
existence in the future
to a process of debt slavery where
everybody's getting into debt because
debt is
mining money that is creation of money
so you have a huge incentive to go and
borrow for buying your house to go back
to the original example because when you
buy it with your own money
you're not creating any new money but
when you buy it with the central bank
with the bank's money new money is
created so you and the bank come out
ahead in that game because you're
essentially devaluing the money of
everybody else in society so that means
everyone is in debt individuals are in
debt corporations are in debts
governments are in debt everybody's
borrowing everybody's indebted to their
future everybody's a slave essentially
and that doesn't change it's not like
you know if you if you get richer then
you know you snap out of this game and
you're secure on the contrary the
richest people are the ones who borrow
the most
and so everybody is in debt and
everybody has that insecurity of debt
everybody has payments to make at the
end of the month and if they don't make
them they lose their business they lose
their home they lose all kinds of
different things so we move to the
system of universal debt slavery
basically and that's really what i try
and explain in terms of what fiat does
and
i mean this is obviously a very high
price but i do try and think about you
know what the benefits of it are and to
be entirely fair
there are benefits to the fiat monetary
system over the previous thing that it
replaced which is that gold is very
expensive to move around and that's why
fiat was able to replace it it wouldn't
have replaced it in a free market
because the cost of moving gold is still
much cheaper than this enormous cost of
you know destroying human civilization
and turning everyone into debt slaves
but
the fact that moving gold around was so
expensive meant that governments could
get away with banning you from using
gold
ultimately you had to in order to use
gold as a trade
as a medium of exchange as money
for trade as the world became more
globalized by the end of the 19th
century
all of people's money was centralized in
banks and then all of the banks were
centralized in a central bank that was
just an inevitable outcome of the fact
that moving gold around is expensive and
so you need to have all of that gold
centralized in central banks and
therefore in the early 20th century when
governments got into wars in world war
one they all went off the gold standard
they all confiscated their government
their citizens gold and they all issued
more paper than they had gold in reserve
and
since then they've gone off the gold
standard and it's now been an entire
century of
uh this insanity and i think it has been
enormously enormously catastrophic for
humanity i think we take it for granted
um you know we think that this is just
human nature but i think um
there's a reason that a lot of very bad
things that happen in the 20th century
aren't such a prevalent part of human
nature before i think this i want to get
into what that is but first i want to
i want to ask a hard question which is
if hard money is so good
how did it get replaced by fiat and is
it really
just because it's hard to move from
place to place or
is it
the combination which you were
stating just now which is
the government comes in and squashes it
basically because you said it's not a
free market so they're
manipulating it somehow breaking down
that free market and leveraging that
it's hard to move from place to place
like
and ask i'm asking the same question in
a different direction
has bitcoin solved the only real issue
well i guess two issues
uh that made the previous
take on hard money gold
vulnerable which is that it's easy to
move across time and space
and
it's hard hard hard meaning that you
there will be 21 million units and that
is it period full stop
absolutely yeah that's kind of you know
thanks for ruining the book i guess
but uh trust me when people get into it
and they see you detail like explaining
the fact that you have a whole like
section
talking about how fiat destroyed food
there is much more in the book for
people to discover i mean it's like
literally crazy i could have unless we
read it in real time uh we would not be
able to destroy the the number of ways
that you you break down the hey this is
water thing this thing that you don't
think is a problem or that you don't
even notice let's start looking at it uh
it's terrifying and we're gonna go
through some of it
but i want i want to answer that
question to see if i'm really
understanding the fundamental issue here
i think you know i i i i that that's
that's really what it is so the bitcoin
standard my first book focuses on uh
bitcoin saleability across time
bitcoin's ability to hold value across
time and that's that's what made gold
that's what made gold money which is the
fact that it is the hardest money its
supply increases at only around 1.5 per
year and so therefore gold is excellent
at holding on to its value and that's
why the bitcoin standard has many
examples about how hard their money
eventually drives out easier money all
throughout human history
the fiat standard focuses on saleability
across space on money's ability to hold
on to its value across space as money as
you move money around and that was
gold's achilles heel because and in the
fiat standard i look at this i look at
how expensive it was to move gold around
and i look at the example of world war
one when gold was demonetized
effectively when those countries moved
off the gold standard we see that the
cost of moving gold around across the
atlantic for instance was around point
five percent somewhere between point one
to one percent of the value of the gold
that you move around so that means that
an a um a bar of gold
um costs a bar of gold to move across
the atlantic 100 times roughly 100 to
200 times you move it across the
atlantic you have to pay as much as the
whole bar of gold that's quite expensive
you know and so that necessarily means
that you can't just keep moving gold
around you have to centralize it and
that in my mind is the achilles heel of
gold that's what makes it uh vulnerable
it's not that governments went door to
door and put guns to people's head and
forced them to hand over their gold in
the majority of the world that's not the
case at least
definitely wasn't the case then you know
the the most important advanced
economies of the world in the early 20th
century they didn't do this in the us in
france and europe and germany that's not
how it happened
but the gold was already there in a
central bank it had to be in a central
bank because you had to have
the system of batching the transactions
effectively and doing periodic clearance
rather than moving the gold around with
each transaction
the
advantage that bitcoin has well two
advantages the first one is that it is
even harder than gold so gold is always
increasing at one and a half to two
percent which means that the supply of
gold the global stockpile of gold
doubles roughly every 50 years or so
40 years 50 years the supply of gold
will double whereas in uh
bitcoin um gold bitcoin supply is never
going to double bitcoin supply is uh
stuck at 21 million and that's it we're
already almost at 19 million so we only
have another 2 million to produce over
the next century or so so
bitcoin supply is completely inelastic
completely irresponsive to demand and
then in the finance standard i compare
also the saleability of
bitcoin across space well with bitcoin
you can move the equivalent of a gold
bar
which is around 700 000 right now you
can move 700 000 across the atlantic
with bitcoin currently for a few cents
i know this is going to go up but it
still has an enormous enormous enormous
margin to go up before it hits anywhere
near the cost of moving gold around so i
think there will be um
you know solutions for scaling bitcoin
that are going to
improve it but
improve the cost of moving bitcoin
around but still it's so much cheaper
than uh gold and it's so much harder to
confiscate than gold that i think it has
a much much much better chance of
defeating government centralization than
gold
okay so
um
now that i think we've laid the
groundwork for people understanding
what the fiat standard is
what i liked about your book is there's
two
you can sort of break the human
experience i'm not sure what the right
word is for it down into really two big
chunks you've got financial and cultural
and in the book you detail
the ways in which both of those are
tremendously impacted
i have a quote sort of that covers each
section from your book and i want to
read the first one
uh now which was
just it literally stopped me in my
tracks and this i'm going to re it's a
long quote but i want to read the whole
thing so that people understand the
financial side of this the implication
of having a system
that inflates over time and uses boom
and bust cycle versus something that um
deflates over time and
it when you hear that
i'm just going to read the quote because
the the the first
time you hear the numbers the the one
that is bad sounds good and the one that
is good sounds bad and it's i think a
huge part of how people end up getting
lost in all of this
all right
this is a quote from the book the
average u.s house price in 1915 was 3
in 2021 it was 269 039
that is a compound annual growth rate in
the price of the house at a rate of 4.18
over 107 years had the fiat standard
adopted a fixed supply in 1914 so not
inflating and prices declined by two
percent per year instead the average
american house today would cost 411
dollars and i can hear people panicking
because that sounds terrible
with a much smaller supply of the dollar
prices would be far lower than they are
today incomes would of course also be
much lower but the decreasing price of
goods means that they become more
affordable over time and that saved
money buys more goods every year 411
dollars in 1915 could have bought your
great grandfather 12 of a house but if
he had saved it and passed it on to you
it would buy you an entire house today
your grandfather's pocket change would
be enough for you to live off of today a
world of decreasing prices would provide
people with a strong reason to save for
the future and one can only imagine how
much better living standards would be
today had humanity not been afflicted by
inflationary fiat
all right
help people understand why on earth they
would want their house to be worth 411
dollars today
that just seems so impossible and so
counterintuitive and so zero-sum like if
bitcoin can't be inflated then if i get
some bitcoin it means y'all
[__] you get no bitcoin or at
least not those so
it seems to somebody who grew up in a
fiat system
it seems bad
why isn't it bad
well i mean if you think it's bad then
why don't you just go move to venezuela
or lebanon where your house is going to
be worth 10 billion of the local uh
currency so you know if you're trying to
collect zeros next to your house
valuation
move to zimbabwe lebanon venezuela go
where the hyper inflation is and you'll
have the most valuable house obviously
people don't care about how many zeros
you attach to their um
to prices of goods you know people care
about the purchasing power of money and
this is this is really one of those very
very very um obvious insights but you
have to basically
um
be part of or subscribe to the ideas of
the austrian school of economics to um
be willing to just accept this very
obvious thing that any human being with
half a brain will accept um
you you have to you know like what do
you prefer would you rather have 10 or
100 yens well 100 yens are worth a lot
less than 10 so people prefer to have
the 10 it doesn't matter the exact
number what matters is the purchasing
power what can you buy with it and so
the choice is not between having a you
know in in a world in which your money
your house would have been worth 400
um your
day-to-day transaction would be done in
cents more or less so you know we'd have
one cent bill and it would be probably
worth something like the 100 bill today
and then we'd have
in some units that are smaller and then
the cent would be divided into smaller
and smaller units
and that's fine so then yeah you could
have your house be worth 400
million uh
of the smaller unit of a cent or
whatever it is
um
but the the point is that in that world
where the money appreciates
every year you know four generations of
your family going back to 107 years ago
every one of your family for the last
four generations every year they had the
choice of saving money that every year
was going to be worth a slightly more
the next year so think about your family
over the last four generations and i
think pretty much everybody no matter
where you are in the world everybody has
gone through you know you everybody's
family has gone through a period in
which they witness their savings um
essentially um get wiped out either it
would happen suddenly you know bank
failure or bank collapse or
financial crisis or it happened
gradually through inflation but
everybody has seen this and everybody
has learned their lesson not to save
everybody has accepted the idea that you
shouldn't be saving
and so everybody has been living in debt
and everybody's been financially
insecure and then because of that that
doesn't seem true now i obviously have
read your book so i know what the
punchline is but i think it's worth
explaining to people because i was
taught to save my mom taught me to save
and yet
as you and i think a lot of people will
feel that way but as you actually look
at what society does versus what your
mother may have told you to do
the evidence starts to mount that people
really really discount the future but
give us a couple examples of how we can
see that the statement that we've all
been taught not to save is true
well i think a lot of parents teach
their kids to save but and it's pretty
bad advice like if you save in the fiat
standard
i mean if you save money if you hold on
to money you're witnessing it basically
lose its value by five ten fifteen
percent per year
and uh you know the the kind of
actionable information from
understanding the fiat so you know when
you read the bitcoin standard you come
up with the conclusion their inescapable
conclusion that you need to buy bitcoin
you need to be long bitcoin because
there's only so many and the world is
going to find out and the price is going
to go up well when you read fiat you
come up with a conclusion that you need
to be short fiat in fact you realize
that that's basically how people get
rich on a fiat standard in fact you know
you look listen to people like say
kiyosaki who wrote a rich man poor man
you look at a lot of the successful
businessmen the way to get rich is to
accumulate hard assets and accumulate
higher cash yielding assets
while accumulating also debt you want to
have your liabilities be
things that are scarce and you want to
have your ass sorry you want to have
your assets be things that are scarce
houses companies real estate stocks
bonds etc
and then you want to have your
liabilities be
fiat you want to have all dollars so
in fact it turns out you know saving is
good for building character for young
people but really once you get into the
real world you know you don't just save
up to buy your house and people who do
that end up really paying a lot more
than if you just take a loan when you
take a loan to pay the house you're
shorting the dollar and then you benefit
from the inflation because the value of
your loan repayment goes down especially
true in the case of hyperinflation you
know i have friends in lebanon who had
the loans to buy houses and then with
the collapse of the lira collapse of the
local currency now their loans are 95
discounted they have to pay them back in
a currency that is
so they kept they keep the house and
they just have to pay
very very little amount of money so the
people who didn't take out loans and
saved money in the bank got marked out
and that's happened all over the world
it happens very quickly during the case
of hyperinflation but it's happening
slowly today around you like imagine if
you have your money in the bank if
you've been saving what is your bank
giving you in terms of interest point
two percent one percent two percent best
case scenario well
you're losing every year five or ten
percent or so because uh look at the
price of the house that you want to buy
especially if you want to buy a nice
house in a nice neighborhood
look at the price you know can you save
up here's the question can you actually
save up to buy a house in miami beach
think about how much income you need in
order to save up to buy a house in miami
beach versus how much income you need to
buy it in debt
if you buy it with debt
you get the short contract on the us
dollar and then your
repayments are going down over time and
so the house is just continuously
getting cheaper and cheaper you know you
live in it today and then it gets
cheaper if you try to save up for it i
mean you need to have astronomically
high
income to be able to save
in a savings account that appreciates it
one percent while the miami beach house
that you want is appreciating at 5 10 15
per year
so help me understand something because
as you're saying this i'm starting to
think okay what do i need to take loans
out on like how do i uh you know get
myself in a better situation
the catch is though that if i'm still
getting paid
in the fiat it's
the the two are tied so it's going down
like my purchasing power is going down
at the same rate that my loan is
technically getting cheaper so it ends
up feeling like a wash so
i guess i'm going back to then your
earlier point i have to have a hard
asset that's going up in value
so i've got that i can't just have my
my short on the dollar i have to have
something over here that's going up so
as this goes down i'm laughing because
it's getting easier and easier for me to
pay it but the key is to have to have
both you can't just have one or you
can't just have the debt i guess the
this was like the kind of breakthrough
insight that made me tie the book
together when michael sailor came into
the bitcoin world and started talking
about how
he's really what his strategy is and his
idea of why he's borrowing in order to
hold bitcoin and when he explained you
know this is what rich people do if
you're rich you have hard assets you
have an old building you have real
estate you have a factory you don't need
to work in a fiat system you just are
constantly refinancing and your loans
continue to get cheaper and you continue
to take out money and the goal you know
is to die with a lot of debt like this
is how you win in the fiat game you win
by accumulating the most debt but you
have to always and this is the this is
the tricky part like this is all right
so this is the kind of uh great um side
of it is that you know you just keep
clocking up more debt and running up a
bigger tab on the bar and then you die
and
you win basically but of course the
risky part and that's that's why i think
you know
it's not a universally good thing the
risky part is that
um
at any month you miss a payment
you risk losing all of your assets so
well not any month you know it's going
to be a few months but if your business
has a few bad months you might miss the
payments you could lose the business and
that's why basically i think you know
it's it's
um everybody's just massively insecure
and everybody is heavily discounting the
future because the future is so much
more uncertain in this world as opposed
to a world in which we just accumulate
savings that appreciate because in that
world where you're trying to accumulate
a positive score it's you know you're
running up a score in terms of let's get
as much gold coins as we can the more
gold coins that you have the better you
sleep at night the more secure you are
the less you have to worry about whether
your business is going to make it this
month or not or whether you're going to
end up being homeless or whether you're
going to lose your business but in a
world in which you have um
in a world in which you have debt and
you're just running up more and more and
more debt
the more debt you're running up the more
insecure you are
this episode is brought to you by peak
where plants and science intersect go to
peaktee.com
impact you'll get five percent off your
first order and use code impact at
checkout to get free shipping enjoy the
episode
yeah
it
this game is is a very complicated game
uh
i never
thought that i would need to pay
attention to this and now i'm realizing
how important it is to really understand
how money works and finances
which is why i've been doing more and
more shows around it okay so i think
we're
starting to understand the financial
implications of fiat
and how
people have to really understand how the
system works in terms of inflation
being problematic your purchasing power
is going down the sort of ultimate
dichotomy of what you're talking about
but it's a risky game
in the end now i want to start getting
into the cultural implications you make
a really strong case in the book that in
fact earlier you alluded to it and you
were like yeah that's the 20th century
for you
i want to read another quote from the
book
around the cultural implications it just
happened to be one specific example that
you were giving and then we can sort of
extrapolate beyond that um
but it really reading your book really
impressed upon me how much
of what i again think of culturally as
just being the reality of the way that
the human world works and that there is
no alternative and seeing that hey a lot
of things can be traced back to
having an easy money system basically so
here's the quote
uh again it's lengthy but i think worth
reading perhaps the most pernicious
effect of the fiatization of the modern
university is the destruction of the
scientific method what passes for
science now is a mix of government
propaganda corporate advertising make
work welfare programs for nerds and
research papers that amount to meaning
free irrelevant irrelevant irrelevant
gibberish this sad state of affairs
persists and survives because government
intervention has removed the market test
for success with funding for research
primarily coming from government
bureaucrats academics don't need to
worry about real-world profitable
applications of their work irrelevant
research bears no cost for the
researcher or his institution and with
universities afforded an effective
subsidy through subsidized loans for
their consumers the market test for
success is removed and universities and
the geeks populating their offices are
free to drift into a world of
insignificance and corruption a world
with little regard for truth the most
obvious manifestation of this is the
mushrooming of entire fields and
departments specialized in producing
completely inconsequential and
incoherent noises and marketing them as
scholarship
what passes for humanities in the modern
university has degenerated into an
endless sea of angry grievances and
rabid victimology consisting almost
entirely of politically corrupt
platitudes and zero substance the end
result is heaps of graduates with zero
marketable skills but a strong talent
for finding ways to take offense at
everything these departments continue to
grow and the professors in them continue
to get paid because they face no real
market test and can continue to secure
financing from the world's biggest money
printer while railing against
inconsequential imaginary and historical
evils
how is that
if let's let's assume that we can get
people to agree some people
how is that the result of fiat money
well um it's obviously the result of
fiat money in my mind because um
universities today don't operate in the
market and that's that's really the key
point in a in a free students can decide
which college they want to go to how's
that not the free market well because
their choice of the choice is not which
college they go to the choice reading is
whether they should go to college or not
and that's a choice that's heavily
skewed by
two ways in which the money printer
intervenes the first is that the money
printer heavily subsidizes student loans
which you know sounds like one of these
um and one of these you know
apple hood and mother uh um no wait
motherhood and apple
motherhood and apple pie kind of ideas
which are just always
you know how could you be against it you
know universities are great
and the reality is no you can actually
be against university i taught at
university and i've been to universities
and i spent a lot of time and i'll tell
you um i i've spoken to many students
where i ask them when they're finishing
their university you know you've just
spent all this amount of money of your
father's money on university and you
still have no idea what you want to do
you know you could have just gone and
worked in this field where you're
interested for four years earning
whatever you could have made and saved
your father's money and now you'd have
all of that money to start a business
wouldn't you better off wouldn't you be
better off and many of them have said
yeah i would and the same thing applies
obviously if you take on loans you know
you end up with four years of no
marketable skills or little marketable
skills and then a big loan
so the reason this is uh
this seems like a good idea is because
the concept of opportunity cost is
destroyed by fiat and this is a theme
that i keep
returning to throughout the book
the idea of opportunity cost is central
to all economics everything has an
opportunity cost everything sounds
everything is a great idea if you don't
think of the opportunity cost you know
going to university for all of your life
collecting university degrees until
you're 90 years old is a great idea you
know yeah let's do a phd in physics and
in mathematics and in linguistics and in
chemistry and and and and and do them
all you know who could hate knowledge
well but there is an opportunity cost
every time you're doing a phd you're not
doing other things you're not starting a
business you're not
earning money you're not having a job so
you
fiat allows us to basically suspend our
conception of what opportunity cost is
instead of because it's removing the
market like how is it
how is it doing that what is the
mechanism by which it creates that
incentive structure
a we can't save our own money so you
your money if you just put it in the
bank it's losing value so you don't want
to save money and b
the government can just
basically
bring money into existence if you just
give them a good idea that appeals to
them so if you do something that sounds
good for the government
you can get infinite amounts of money
for it and there's really no cost to it
so
they're able to make more money
out of thin air and that's really what
distorts all of those things in a free
market with hard money the universities
can't just continue to teach irrelevant
nonsense all of these econ departments
teaching fantasy economics keynesian
economics they can't continue to teach
all of this nonsense because you're
clearly producing people with a very
delusional perspective on the world and
when they get out into the world they
can't
succeed with these ideas but if you're
being paid to do it by somebody who has
a money printer who can just make as
much money as possible
as is needed in order to continue to
keep this out happening nobody's really
paying the cost or the people who are
paying the cost are society at large and
so i'm not tracking this so
uh how how is the government paying the
schools does this only count for
governmental schools does this also
cover private schools is it because the
loans are easy to get like in what way
is the government two main ways the
first one is loans to students so this
is enormously subsidized very low
interest rates and that's just massively
tempting for people to get in because
you know you can take out
essentially you know a couple hundred
thousand dollars when you're 18 years
old i mean and that's the government
mining for fiat to get people into the
government mining fiat because you know
education is uh motherhood and apple pie
and um the other aspect of it is that
the majority of university income comes
from uh research grants government
research grants so
um
the the role of the government in
financing universities is enormous you
know tuition fees are only a small chunk
of university income and universities
that rely on tuition fees are just uh
they can't compete with the big
universities that get government money
for research so
that's you know that's and i discussed
in in detail in the chapter on fiat
science i think you know if you wonder
why is it that
you know every day there's a new
headline about coffee causing cancer but
also protecting from cancer and wine
causes cancer while also protecting from
cancer and tomatoes can cause this while
actually protecting
it's there's an infinite supply of money
to be churning out these studies um
because you know people some think that
this science is a good thing so
um
if you're in an academic position
there's no cost to publishing something
that is wrong but there's a very high
cost for not publishing
and so because of the high cost for not
publishing because you lose your job you
have to publish in order to keep your
job so everybody's just it's a big giant
um
rat race where everybody's you know
they're running on this mill where
they're producing all these papers that
nobody reads and nobody cares if they're
right or wrong there's no sense of you
know
let's actually figure out is coffee good
for you or is it not does it cause or
protect from cancer does it make you
live forever or does it
kill you on the spot nobody cares you
can publish papers on with all of these
conclusions as long as you are
um you know as long as you're just
basically adhering by the kind of
superficial standards of these papers so
there's no sane
kind of sense of what's the real
opportunity cost because there's no
market test there's no
test of all right well this guy said
this in this paper let's take this out
into the real world and see if it
actually works in that way
you don't have to have the market test
the market test is not applied to this
and that's why you can get all these
insane ideas come out of universities
today and you know i begin by
knocking on humanities because that's
easy and everybody does it but i think
you know humanity is not much better
than the natural sciences because really
i mean people are freaking out about the
idea that cow farts are going to boil
oceans and that's university research
and they're freaking out about all kinds
of things it's it's a constant stream of
hysteria because if you have concerning
hysterical findings that suggest oh no
you know the earth is going to
be destroyed
then you are more likely to get funding
there's no opportunity cost to the
people providing financing they don't
have to think about
whether we are better off directing our
resources toward
this researcher or that researcher in
the sense of which one is going to give
us a more accurate answer they are
thinking about it from the perspective
of
the
the you know if this is concerning we
need to give all the resources that we
can and that's why
research budgets just continue to
mushroom
and the amount of research that is
produced continues to mushroom and the
research is always headed in the way of
more hysteria and more concern and more
calamities you know
it's chicken littleism basically as an
idea because um
that's the motivation if you if you go
into research and say well i've looked
into cow farts and i've concluded cow
farts are not going to destroy planet
earth well guess what
you don't need more funding to study cow
farts anymore that's it that's done but
if i look into cow farts and i think oh
no cow farts are going to destroy the
planet well now i need a much bigger
research budgets to look into them and i
read a research center and i need to
hire a whole bunch of people to look
into it with me
and so we see how this
is reflected in many fields where we go
all through these
hysterias where everybody is always
fascinated by this
and uh of course that also
helps with that also will
inevitably be driven by the agendas of
the people funding it it's ultimately
political it's ultimately government
money it's bureaucracies that are
that have political goals and objectives
and so they push
funding
toward the um
kind of hysteria that they want to hear
about
okay so i'm going to
uh see if i can reiterate all of this
there are some pretty
uh aggressive claims so
all right you've got
the government is printing money they
can print as much as they want
they mine
uh fiat by getting people in debt
one of because we're talking about
universities but it really is just one
of the examples you use in the book
so we're just going through this example
as one way fiat distorts incentives
which then have these huge knock-on
effects
so they mine for
fiat by getting people in debt one of
the the sort of easy targets because
it's motherhood and apple pie is
education so let's make education nice
and
cheap so we subsidize the loans so the
loans have a very low cost
students take out then these massive
loans to go to school but which could be
a good thing were it turning out people
that are extraordinarily gifted at
things that the world cares about deeply
and that really matter and move the
needle in a meaningful way for humanity
but we don't end up with that result
because
there is a an incentive that i don't
know if it was originally tied to fiat
or not but a decision was made that
publishing is good okay so to keep your
job you must publish
i'll say i'll say the issue here is that
you know
think about the example of soviet cars
why did soviet cars suck
because they were produced in the same
way that modern research in modern
american universities is produced it's
from the top down imagine you know it's
the same thing you have a committee of
people that decide which car factory is
going to get funding and then they
allocate the cars to the consumers
whereas in non-soviet countries you know
compare east german cars to west german
cars in west germany mercedes or bmw
they had to make their own cars and they
had to come up with their own decisions
and they had to then get the consumer to
willingly take money out of their own
pocket to pay for the car so that forces
them to make cars that are good that
don't suck that convince the consumer to
come up with something that
to come up with valuable money and pay
for it but in the soviet union when the
money comes from above
the
you know you don't even have to posit
and this is kind of the key insight from
austrian economics when it comes to
socialism is that socialism is not an
incentive problem it's not just that you
have corrupt people it's not that you
have lazy people socialism is a
calculation problem this is the economic
problem of socialism and it's something
that most socialists cannot come to
terms with even if you solve the
incentive problem of socialism it is not
uh it is not a workable system because
it's not possible for the east german
car factory to figure out how to make
cars properly unless they get feedback
from the customer unless they put the
cars out and the customers willingly pay
for them and the customers have a choice
between their car and all the other cars
and they choose this model rather than
that model and then the and then the
producer asks themselves why is it that
they like this over that one
let's focus on the things that they like
let's get rid of things that don't they
don't like let's focus on the things
that we can make profitably if you can
make something profitably that's telling
you that you're using your capital
productively so when you sever that
process so that the money doesn't come
from the consumer the money comes from
above from
basically the money printer you end up
with shitty
east german cars and you end up with
shitty academic journals that produce
all this pseudoscience and babble
basically
wow that was a really good way of
explaining that okay that uh that
certainly hits home
central planning is an idea that runs
through the book
and
why do we have the temptation towards
central planning and how is
a hard money
like bitcoin or maybe to you bitcoin is
the only thing that's going to make this
happen
how is that going to solve the problem
does it shift incentive structures what
what does that look like
yeah i think it's it's it's all about
the
figurative printing press it's all about
the ability to make debt into money um
so what happened in world war one and
the first couple of chapters of the book
a little bit more history which looks at
the way in which that monetary system
was installed in the west
during world war one
you know
later on in the 1930s
a con artist by the name of john maynard
keynes came along and wrote a bunch of
stupid books about uh why this actually
is a better way of running the monetary
system but this is this is really just
like the the the fake excuse that you
come up with after you've already you
know so you've totaled your father's car
and then you go to your dad and you tell
him you know that i actually i think
this is better for you you don't need
the headlights let me explain to you why
cars are better without headlights um
but you know they went off the gold
standard in 1914
1516 there was never a an admission it
was it was totally surreptitious it was
manipulative it was a lie it was um done
by central banks behind people's back
and there was never an honest admission
that hey we're going off the gold
standard there's always nowhere on the
gold standard we're coming back to the
gold standard we're just suspending
redeemability for a bit don't worry
about it everything's going to be fine
we're just fighting a war what example
did he give for why
it was this car is better without
headlights
well basically
it's it it's it's um
it's extremely stupid i have to say like
i and i mean this not just you know to
throw away a gratuitous insult it's a
very well earned insult it's the idea
that uh if you have a recession which
was the case in the 1930s because they
had gone off the gold standard for 20
years and had been trying to um
trying to basically pretend that they
were still on the gold standard while
they were off the gold standard that
causes recessions you know you you have
um complete dislocation in the in the
labor market and in all kinds of
products markets where people are unable
to
invest and spend money in a way that is
um
um the the the you know that
that meets uh market demands and so you
have you know just like you if you had
price controls in anything you get
shortages and uh surpluses you had price
controls over wages and labor and so
that's what led to unemployment
so the
same answer would have been
get rid of those shortages and stop the
inflation and then you know it's gonna
mark prices will adjust and people will
go back to work just like they were
working before 1914 when you had the
gold standard for 50 60 years and you
didn't have these um massive economic
problems that occurred after
abandoning the gold standard
but
effectively what they did is they broke
the gold standard and they blamed the
gold standard for why it didn't work so
they what he said was these this
unemployment is caused by a an
insufficient amount of demand people are
just not spending enough money and
they're not spending enough money
because we're on the gold standard and
the way to fix it is for the government
to print a whole bunch of money and hand
it out to people and then that you know
it's like getting an engine going you
know you crank the engine and then it
gets going so if we just throw in a
whole bunch of spending the engine will
get going and then we'll have more money
um
circulating in the economy and then that
leads to more people being hired and
then when people start getting hired
more and more they'll start spending
more and more and then the economy kicks
into gear
isn't that true though like
i get how it devalues the money
but
if you're if you so you made an argument
earlier that i completely buy into which
is when you go to a fiat standard you
discount the future and therefore people
spend money so it may be a horrible
reason to do it but if you
do
create this thing where people are
discounted in the future the money is
going down in value
money's there to be spent you will
create until the bubble bursts you will
create this sense of like word i've got
money i'm going to spend it so
didn't it get the engine going just at a
huge cost
it gets a destructive engine going it
gets an engine going where we save less
we destroy capital we consume capital
it's basically eating the seed corn
that's the thing so you know
if you sold all of your properties today
yeah you could spend a lot of money this
week like you could throw the sickest
party of your life if you sold
everything you owned
and that's that's really the logic there
so the the same kind of classical
economist what they were saying is get
back on the gold standard and then
prices will fall where they uh will
adjust to where they need to be and
people will spend money as much as they
need to and um
you know
markets will clear and the world will
work as it did now did you look at it
closely enough to know why the
unemployment actually was happening
yeah the reason unemployment was
happening was because of the inflation
so the the
the part that the keynesian skip
is the part of the history which i focus
on in chapter one which is that the
money supply in england more than
doubled during the period between 1914
and 1920. so the money supply doubled
and the suspen and the redemption of
gold the redemption of the um british
pound into gold was suspended so you
couldn't
buy gold from the central bank you
couldn't just go and give them their
paper and take gold because they had so
much gold paper outstanding so they'd
inflate the money supply and they wanted
people to believe that they didn't
inflate the money supply so they wanted
to keep wages and prices as they were
but obviously that's impossible that's
like trying to
um square a circle because people are uh
you know there's more money out there so
prices are rising
and then uh because prices are rising
people are unable to buy a lot of the
things that they want to buy and so
you end up with shortages you end up
with surpluses you end up with
problems in the labor market worker
businesses can't hire workers because
they can't sell their goods so all of
this would have been solved if the bank
of england just said you know what sorry
we messed up we were fighting a war with
the evil germans we had to do this
we
did an inflation we're sorry
let's revalue the pound you know if they
just revalued the pound it said all
right it's let's go back to a gold
standard but we have to evaluate it like
i think it would have been 20 30 percent
less
revalued compared to gold
exactly so the the price of gold
one ounce of gold was about four pounds
at that time four and a quarter pounds
425 so if they'd just
gone back to a gold standard at one
ounce of gold with five pounds
then you know it would have sucked for
people who had savings
um but it would have been just one time
hit and then you're back to building on
a solid foundation you're back to having
a
a free market economy where prices
reflect fundamentals and where wages
will adjust in a way that gets everybody
working but as long as they were trying
to manipulate this as long as they were
trying to hide that deception they
continue to suffer from the problem of
unemployment
and then and and like the really the
really scammy thing about it is that
what you're doing by printing money is
the same thing as you would do if you
just let the wages fall
and keynesians
are the only people stupid enough to
think that
uh people
people would rather earn less money with
more numbers
or less value with more numbers
than um you know the same amount of
value or with uh smaller numbers it's
it's it's ridiculous it's the same
example that we were mentioning earlier
about the house the keynesians are the
only people who would tell you know it's
better to live in a house that has a lot
of zeros next to its valuation they're
the only people who would move to a
higher inflationary economy because that
would mean that they could buy a house
that's worth a lot of trillions of
dollars
it's it's nonsense so you know the
workers needed to take a pay cut and
that was the result of the inflation if
you didn't want the workers to take a
pay cut you shouldn't have done the
inflation but the government's because
they it was a democracy they had
elections they didn't no president or
prime minister anywhere in the world
wanted to be the one to go up and say
hey guys
sorry the minimum wage has to go down
you have to start earning less that's
just political suicide so what you do is
you print a lot of money and then the
real wage drops even though the nominal
wage stays the same and so you know your
salary was 100 let's say and it used to
be that well if you just take 80
everything would go back to normal and
the economy would revive and we'd be
back on a gold standard well let's just
print twenty percent more money and now
your hundred dollars are worth eighty
dollars and now we didn't give you a pay
but you still get the hundred dollars
exactly you just don't get the hundred
dollars of value
exactly that's really all that's the
keynesian scam in a nutshell and like
keynes admits it and and and it's it's
the book i think is is is an absolutely
pathetic uh
intellectual exercise of just
equivocating and
um trying to justify this and trying to
find ways of um
[Music]
making this
explainable unacceptable by somebody who
just um clearly had no understanding of
economics in any meaning really
interesting so i buy the argument
what i will say is that
as you have pointed out you've got
it will be more palatable and so when
you're what i i know virtually nothing
about austrian economics but the little
thing that i do know which is that it's
an acknowledgement that humans
derive value subjectively in their minds
now it might be based on something
but ultimately you need that subjective
layer
it seems to me again i know even less
about keynesian economics than i know
about
austrian economics but
it does seem to even though it's gross
and i don't like it that they're taking
advantage of this
that keynesian
economists are saying look it's just
reality like people aren't going to
respond to that and people would whether
they should or not they would rather
have a house that's valued at
you know 269 000 than 411 dollars it
just is and if you ignore that fact
you're going to ignore it at your own
peril
and
while i actually think they are wrong
and i in my limited economic my limited
ability to understand economics um find
myself gravitating towards your argument
i can't help even as i invest
into bitcoin i cannot help but have
unease
about what happens societally
at least through the transition
you know maybe just like you said hey
just suck it up it was you were getting
a hundred dollars you're going to get 80
value no matter what so let's just call
it 80
i worry that in that moment
there is in that moment i don't know if
that's a year i don't know if it's 10
years but as we transition to a hard
money standard because you've said over
time
societies that can always do
move towards hard money and it certainly
seems like we're moving towards hard
money now
but that there will be a reaction
and there will be a reaction from some
people there will be a reaction from
governments
and
while it's gross at least as you present
the keynesian side that is gross i'm
with you i don't like it doesn't feel
right but there they are hinting at a
truth of human nature that is going to
we are going to have to
deal with reconcile
something when people
start getting real upset that their
money isn't worth what they thought it
was
i think that's um that's
that's incorrect because the the reality
is they try and present it the
keynesians always try and present it as
if they're out there looking for the
little guy but the reality is they're
just looking out for the big banks and
the government they're looking out for
the people in power
to keep everybody quiet like hey let's
just keep not even that not even that
not even that because the real the
people who would really get hurt from
this the people who would really get
hurt from the kind of so
what what we're arguing against is
here's the thing like again it's it's
it's the cane it's the fiat idea of
opportunity cost not existing that
even makes the debate frameable in these
terms
if you're going to inflate if you're
going to have the ability of the
government to just get off the gold
standard and continue to inflate it's
not like you're just going to solve this
problem once and for all and then it's
over then the the
you know this inflation is going to lay
the groundwork for the next bubble
with the next credit expansion when then
we get the next
uh um
crash and then that would require the
next set of adjustments which is going
to require more credit expansion so the
choice is not you know we just take the
pain once
um
and then we solve this problem and we
prevent social unrest it's we get into
this problem we get into this world
where government and the banking system
have the ability to constantly make more
and more money to their benefit while
presenting it as if it is to the benefit
of the working class while constantly
screwing over the working class who are
constantly going getting laid off and
going through these business cycles
that's one side of it on the other hand
we have an actual example of what
happened when you know this kind of
unpopular
um supposedly catastrophic and
apocalyptic path was taken
and that was what happened in the us the
us did not do what the british did in
1920 after the war the u.s actually did
go through a recession in 1920. the u.s
went back on the gold standard in 1921
or 22 i'm not sure exactly i mentioned
in the book
and then it suffered a short and sharp
recession
and
fortunately for the us apparently at
that time president calvin coolidge was
a guy who knew how to have fun and had
more pressing things to do than go and
destroy the economy with keynesian
insanity so he was throwing parties and
um enjoying himself in the white house
while the recession basically it was a
painful recession that went on for a few
months but then after that recession was
over the economy recovered and then you
had a massive boom in the 1920s so
britain on the other hand continued to
suffer through this pain of constantly
seeking to lie about the fact that they
went off the gold standard and couldn't
go back on the gold standard throughout
the 1920s and so its problems continued
to get exacerbated throughout the 1920s
and then what they did effectively was
export their inflation problem to the us
beca and i discussed this in detail in
the book the british central bank
bank of england
basically convinced the french and the
american central banks to inflate their
own money supply in order to prevent the
flight of gold from england to the us
because in the u.s in england okay you
couldn't redeem your
pounds for gold
but you could redeem your pounds for
dollars which you could then redeem for
gold in the us and then ship your
dollars to england so people continue to
do that and they would sell there and
that would cause the gold
to leave england and so the english
somehow convinced the poor american
really simpleton central bankers that
the
that the way to fix the problems of
england was to have inflation in the u.s
and that's what led to the big inflation
of the 1920s which led to the great
depression which led to the stock market
crash of 1929 and then the great
depression so
we have the test of that we had we've
had these examples many times across
history where you have the quick sharp
painful recession for a few months and
then life goes back to normal and
everybody recovers
and
on the other hand you have the system
where we're constantly
inflating more and more which is what
happened in the 1930s both in britain
and in the u.s and that serves people in
power people in government and of course
it serves banks because you know the
the biggest creditors
are banks the biggest borrowers are
banks they're the ones who benefit the
most from the devaluation of the
currency because they're the ones who
owe the biggest amounts of money
wow okay so the plot thickens
uh as you were explaining all that i
thought okay then
if people been playing all these games
with money this whole time and smart
people already sort of understand the
game
and
bitcoin is a better gold than that all
sort of fingers point to gold as being
uh it should give us examples of what
bitcoin is going to look like in terms
of how it settles into
um the the basket of offerings if you
will so
if we know that we're deflating the
currency over time it's value
and that we want hard assets why isn't
gold because like there's a a picture
being presented of like yo bitcoin is
going to be worth a gazillion dollars
like this is crazy just hold it
but that didn't happen to gold it hit
some sort of threshold and then it just
sort of wavers
so
is that because
gold is still deflationary at two
percent a year and that creates
that gives it that sort of
ceiling or is it that bitcoin is only
ever going to match gold and so we're
just replacing that and it's you know i
mean look it's interesting it's very
valuable to be trillions of dollars
but
it's not going to be that thing that
just like keeps eating more and more
asset classes because if people didn't
react to gold like must have it why
would they react like that to bitcoin
because again it goes back to the point
about gold's spatial saleability gold
just can't play the role of money as
long as governments don't let it play
that role it needs central banks it
needs complicated settlement
infrastructure and all of that in order
for that to happen uh you know you need
the permission of governments you need
physical
infrastructure to allow governments that
gov
in physical infrastructure to be allowed
by governments to operate and so that's
why today you know um
and in the fiat standard you know i look
at where
if you want to think about what is
gold's what is bitcoin's potential
uh gold is just
the first uh the first wrong of the
ladder really because gold is not what
people use as cash today like how much
of your
portfolio or the average person's
portfolio is in gold today very little
some people hold significant amounts of
gold but the vast majority don't and you
still hold cash
but your cash really in in a sense there
are two things that you can hold in your
portfolio you can hold cash or you can
hold investment
investments are equity that yield a
return and they have a risk so that's
the risk part of your portfolio
cash is something where you are trying
to be conservatives you don't want to
you don't want to take a risk with it
you want to just hold on to it the point
of it is that it holds on to value so
what do people use today that is not
meant to offer risk that is meant to
hold on to value
physical cash is one thing a saving
account is another gold is one small
thing but the major one you know the
major part of people's portfolio that
plays the role of cash is bonds
bonds because they don't have equity
risk so you're you're you have senior
uh creditor uh you know if you if the
company that is issuing a bond goes
bankrupt the bond payers the bondholders
get paid before the stockholders so
that's why people want to hold bonds and
of course government bonds you know you
get the government being able to print
money which makes things easier for you
so
in a sense
gold can't fulfill these functions
because governments want their bonds to
replace the function of gold that's
really the kind of scam they want you to
hold their bonds because that just gives
them money allows them to print money
allows them to finance themselves allows
them to find us all the stupid [__]
that they like
and so
we have you know the total uh gold uh
market in the world is something in the
range of around 10 trillion dollars
but the total bond market is somewhere
in the range of 100 to 140 trillion
dollars or something like that so
exactly so
man maybe i just have not been paying
close enough attention but the
bond as the governmental dirty trick of
creating a gold-like
safe thing uh whoa
okay that's uh
one that's exciting from there's a
bigger asset class that people are
already using for this thing because
when i
i listened to michael saylor a lot and
again maybe i just never heard him say
it or wasn't paying attention somehow
but haven't thought about that people
often talk about you know is it going to
start eating into real estate because
real estate is used as a hard asset
and i was always like but real estate
you can live in so there's like a
thing i just can't see real estate
ceasing to be a thing um
but bonds
i can see bond ceasing to be a thing yes
that's kind of one of the uh
one of my conclusions of my analysis in
the book that i have why in in one of
the final chapters i basically argue
bitcoin's going to end this entire
barbaric idiotic practice of bonds i
think bitcoin is going to eat the bond
market i see no reason for bonds to
exist in a bitcoin world i think bonds
exist because borrowing
is
the equivalent of mining and bonds are
debt and that's why
bond issuance is so profitable but
this has just been abused to a point
right now where i mean uh you know
governments
um
highly highly irresponsible governments
have bonds that are trading in the
billions it's it's insane that people
give them this money and it's it
shouldn't be the case um if you look at
say for instance you know the us
government is at a triple a rating but
if you looked at its balance sheet and
you were if you treated it as a
corporation and you looked at its
balance sheets and i discussed the
details of this you know like what a
bondholder if you told them all right
look at the numbers let's say you
knocked out three zeros from the numbers
and um
you turned it from trillions to billions
and he told them here's a corporation
let me see what you think of their uh
their rating they would not be a triple
a rated uh bond they would be junk bond
they'd be
you know b plus sorry b minus or double
b or something like that depending on
which rating but they'd be junk firmly
in the junk category and that's the us
government and then you know you look at
the rest of the other governments they
all be um subjunct they would not even
get on the bond market if it was like
that and i think um simply because they
spend so much more than they make
exactly and the only reason that they
can get into bonds is because everybody
is counting on their ability to inflate
their money supply and devalue their
people so the bond market is just
it's evil through and through
wow uh when you say it like that it is
um
it doesn't sound good man this is crazy
this is crazy i have stepped through a
door that uh i did not see coming
um
so as i walk through this door and i
have more and more realizations like
this that the bond market is
i'll say potentially evil i have i'm
just so new to me as a concept uh but
ooh i don't have any arguments against
it as you explain it but i mean look at
it today you know you're even the best
bonds are not keeping up with inflation
like even if you're taking on risk with
bonds and you're getting high interest
rate you're not keeping up with
inflation so the entire practice is just
falling apart and uh holding on to
bitcoin is so infinitely better and it's
so much more secure and it doesn't have
default risk
it's uh that's that's that's the real
jackpot you know
gold is just going to be the small
little appetizer that we have before
devouring the bond market i think
whoa
i'll be turning that into a clip
uh jesus man
okay so now my next question and this is
the one that uh i
think about maybe more than i want to
this
does this happen peacefully
because it doesn't seem like the
government is going to let go of their
ability to create bonds
uh
and other things just the ability to
print the ability like saying out loud
that the government or anybody is using
debt as a mining mechanism to bring
value to themselves like whoa don't you
think at some point that there is going
to be i mean china's obviously already
said [__] this like no crypto for you or
at least no non-governmental crypto uh
does bitcoin take over peacefully
uh you know i don't have a
um i i don't have a um
a crystal ball
i don't know
um the
the kind of uh
conclusion of the book
is and and the really powerful thing
about remember when we we've started
this discussion i told you you know
approaching
uh fiat from the lens of um
how i analyzed bitcoin would be the best
way to try and appreciate this question
of how is it that bitcoin um
arises
and i think i came up with a very very
important conclusion from this which i
think is pretty original i don't think
anybody else has uh mentioned this
before
which is that what we are doing with
fiat is that we're monetizing debt
and what bitcoin is doing is it is
monetizing a hard asset just like gold
but with wings it can fly very easily
so this means that with uh
as as a goal as bitcoin continues to get
monetized
we
our demand for holding on to debt and
our demand for needing to get into debt
are both reduced
so
people think all right well
bitcoin rises that means that everybody
dumps the dollar and the dollar goes to
zero
but that's only one side of the story
the other side of the story is that as
bitcoin rises
people don't get into debt and therefore
don't issue debt and therefore the
issuance of the dollar declines as well
so not only does the dollar's demand
decline but also the dollar supply
declines
and so
i think there's a case to be made that
this is uh
an upgrade this is this is a
technological upgrade this is the free
market coming up with a genius solution
to the problem that is this fiat cancer
that the world has because
it's going to we're going to witness the
bitcoin economy appreciate more and more
and we're going to witness the um fiat
economy
um
basically
drift into more and more irrelevance
the supply of fiat is going to contract
because people are going to be issuing
fewer
debt
less debt fewer bonds you know people
are not going to want to hold on to
bonds so you you think you know if you
extrapolate michael saylor
and you extrapolate el salvador you
extrapolate all the bitcoin holders
they're taking out bonds from their
portfolio and they're buying bitcoin so
they're reducing the demand for the
issuance of bonds they're reducing the
demand for the insurance of more debt
and they're
causing
so there's no reason
that that should lead to a massive
collapse in fiat
it is just going to lead to the bitcoin
economy growing and appreciating while
the fiat economy stagnates and the value
of fiat continues to do what it is
always supposed to do which is shrink in
real terms
and in fact
the reason why i think i mean i if i
were to make it the optimistic case and
i have known to be delusionally
optimistic before i'm a liverpool fan
who spent 30 years thinking liverpool
are going to win the league
every year um but then they did win it
after 30 years so it's not entirely you
were right
yeah i was right yeah
so
to make the kind of delusionally
optimistic uh case here is that
um
the people who have power in the world
are all in debt the people who have
money the people who have wealth are all
in debt
and
perhaps
you know maybe bitcoin is taking away
their ability to
print money
but bitcoin also devalues their debt and
that's a great thing
so
if
this
you know if we just the next 20 years
are just a continuation of what we saw
in the next in the last 10 years
all of the world's most powerful people
are going to witness their debt
liabilities
uh wither away into tiny fraction of
what they are in real terms
and the best way for them to do that you
know that's a great thing so they will
hold less and less
and they can accumulate dollars uh sorry
they can accumulate bitcoin and as they
accumulate bitcoin you know they benefit
from the bitcoin appreciating and they
benefit from their debt devaluing that's
the michael sailor strategy so as more
and more people do this
we reduce the supply of dollars we
reduce the demand for dollars and we
reduce the value of dollars
and that works out fine for
um
the people who have power and the people
who have influence and the people who
have money and the government's even
like you're basically giving everybody
uh that jubilee that's kind of the
argument that i put in the last chapter
bitcoin can be the global debt jubilee
because it's
i'm just gonna make that worth less and
less and less and it's going to
allow us all to upgrade
one at a time you know as we
grasp what is going on
one by one we upgrade
uh into a superior technology i think
we'll have you know we'll have
hyperinflations we'll always be having
hyperinflation but when we do have those
if they're not going to be caused by
bitcoin they're going to be caused by
insane governments like the lebanese and
venezuelan governments doing what insane
governments have always done
but um
[Music]
i think the long-term perspective here
is that um in the long run i think
bitcoin just continues to grow and fiat
continues to wither away
but i have to say
that was the kind of idea with which i
started writing the book
but then the whole cove insanity
happened and now
i think with all this noise being made
about the central bank digital
currencies that makes me um less
delusionally optimistic about that
scenario because i think
central bank digital currencies take
away that property of fiat as being debt
and turns it into just basically
the equivalent of the money printing
remember i was saying earlier that when
you get hyperinflation it's always when
we was it's always when the government
just stops um
it's always when the government shifts
to cranking out new physical pieces of
money well central bank digital
currencies are the equivalent of running
the printer
but digital printer
and there's no restraint in terms of the
credit creation that goes on
and there's
it's just straight up inflation with
credit creation with credit money with
fiat money you know the the credit
creation leads to a boom and then
there's a bust and the money supply
contracts and so that is a restraint on
the growth in the money supply
but if you're just printing out money
and handing it to people and um
buying their votes essentially which
seems to be the case of what's going to
happen
i think things are likely to get uglier
and fast
why would that make things uglier
because there's no business cycle
there's no restraint there's no uh uh
there's no so we won't get the bus it
will just be inflation inflation
inflation inflation exactly
so
since most of the
money that's injected back into the
system is done digitally anyway i think
earlier you said 10 physical 90 digital
um why is removing the 10 of the
physical so potent potentially that i
don't understand that
um
it's not about the physical it's it's
about the fact it's it's not that you're
removing the physical part it's um
the the
converting the physical to digital is
inconsequential it's the fact that
um well it's inconsequential in itself
but
the important part is that it allows you
to replace the credit
dollar
with
straight up
central bank digital currency
and so that currency now exists it's
basically physical
but it's
i see so before because the money wasn't
real anyway when the value disappeared
because you couldn't pay your house
poof that money is now out of the system
and so there was a constant sort of
rebalancing but now we're making a
physical it's digital but it now exists
i can track it it's a it's a thing on a
blockchain presumably that now will go
on forever so there's no check to make
it evaporate
exactly
whoa
okay
interesting
save
uh
yeah this is very intriguing and
terrifying and exciting i don't want to
lie i'm more excited than i am scared if
i'm completely honest
and like you i may be delusionally
optimistic but
that is uh that's interesting i have no
ability to prognosticate about what is
going to happen in that scenario it is
something very interesting to think
about
um
man your book blew me away absolutely
incredible your interviews are always
amazing where can people find out more
about you follow along on this crazy
journey
my website safedeen.com you can buy my
books from there and you can sign up for
my website where i offer uh courses in
economics and the economics of bitcoin
and economics in the austrian school
tradition so you can join the membership
on my website safedeen.com you can buy
the books from there and i'm also pretty
active on twitter at safedeen and
there's also my podcast the bitcoin
standard podcast
amazing awesome dude thank you so much
for joining me this is incredible i hope
this is the first of many and speaking
of first of many if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care peace